---
title: Bazin's Ontology and Text Reception
author: Jacob Martin
shortauthor: jacob
category: otherworldliness
tags: film
summary: Bazin argues that cinema is objectivity in time—presenting the world as it is seen through time, unlike previous art forms.  He also argues that cinema is a language, which is a necessary implication because the assertion of its objectivity implies cinema is an act of language &hellip; 
layout: default
---
(N.B.--This essay was originally written as a counter to film theorist André Bazin's assertions that film is the most real and high of the plastic arts.)

Bazin argues that cinema is objectivity in time—presenting the world as it is seen through time, unlike previous art forms.  He also argues that cinema is a language, which is a necessary implication because the assertion of its objectivity implies cinema is an act of language.  I argue that Bazin is correct in his assertion that film is inherently symbolic--suggesting always questions of ontology and language.  However, I disagree with his position that film is objectivity in time; I argue, rather, using scenes from Italian neo-realism, direct cinema, and postmodern cinema, that film still presents a subjective viewpoint and this is a necessary conclusion from its symbolic nature.

Film’s very substrate subsists on an ontological question, namely the presence of either silver halide or elemental silver.  Even modern digital cameras make photographs from presence or absence of light or electrical charge.  The question of film is a question of the symbolic--of absence or presence.  Consider the first time Antonio and Maria see The Wise One in *Bicycle Thieves.*  When the bicycle is photographed outside of the apartments, the film immediately poses an ontological, symbolic question: Will the bicycle exist to Antonio when he comes back?  The photograph also resolves this when it shows the bicycle still there.  In the diegesis of the film, the photograph is the world.  What is present in the photograph is present in the world and vice versa.  All that can be objectively said is true about the world is shown on the film.  When the camera leaves the bicycle, the viewer can no longer objectively say that the bicycle is there.  Characters lie and grope in darkness for truth, but the light of the photograph is the objective in the diegesis of the film.

However, even in that diegesis, the photograph is not the real.  It cannot show everything, even in the world of the film.  Antonio’s bicycle exists, even if as just parts floating an effectively infinite distance from the photograph.  The photograph cannot encapsulate all that is real, and so even though it is symbolic, it is not necessarily subjective.  It has a viewpoint.  Even if that viewpoint is not a person’s, it exists, and it paints the world as it pleases.  In fact, cinema cannot even answer all questions of ontology.  For instance, we do not know whether Antonio’s bicycle exists as a gestalt or merely as parts.

When the camera left the bicycle, it intended to pose the question of the bicycle’s being.  That intent, in this case, reflects the intent of the authors of the film.  In fact, the only way to extricate the camera from an actual person’s viewpoint is to give it some sort of consciousness, but that doesn’t remove its viewpoint, it just gives it an autonomous one.  I illustrate this by using another scene from Bicycle Thieves.  Consider when Antonio, Bruno, and his friends are in the market looking for parts that resemble Antonio’s bicycle.  This is the most present editing in the movie.  While the editing in most parts is seamless and story-like, the editing through this scene is present as the camera switches viewpoints between characters.  This editing is necessary to reveal the truth.  The camera alone could not effectively convey what is happening in this scenario.  Either its viewpoint would be so far withdrawn that one could not even recognize the actions of individuals or it would be so necessarily enclosed that one could only recognize the actions of a single individual.  The cinema had to speak through its language to convey its truth--its objectivity.

However, as above, this required a viewpoint.  It required consciousness.  It required a painter.  Bazin was mistaken to say that photography eliminated the need for realism from the painter.  It merely gave painters another medium onto which to paint.  To convey effectively the idea of the plight of these individuals—which was very real in both the diegesis of the film and more broadly in the real world—the film had to admit certain falsehoods within its language.  Again, this stems from the limits of the viewpoint of the camera.  If the camera were able to transplant the true nature of the situation into the mind of the viewer, its symbolic language would not be necessary to bridge the real and the imaginary.  It would be objectivity in time, as Bazin states.  However, the camera still has a viewpoint, so it cannot be truly objective.

In fact, every attempt at making cinema objective ultimately fails.  Even through Italian neo-realism’s insistence on non-actors, lack of a script, loose storylines, and realism it fails to completely objectify the world it shows.  It fails to mummify it in time, as Bazin suggests.  For even though it presents many immutable, connected, objective snapshots of its world, the camera cannot extricate itself from its presentation.  I illustrate this again by example.  Take the scene when Antonio comes back home after receiving the news about his job and fetches Maria.  As they walk back into their home, there is a very touching moment when Antonio goes to help Maria with the buckets of water.  It gives visceral feelings to the viewer of love and compassion.  It incites the viewer’s sympathy for their plight, just as the language of that connection intended.  This moment is a real one within the film, for it stirs the viewer in a real fashion.  It effects a real change.  However, the diegetic truth of their plight and subsequent emotion could not have been proffered without a slip of objectivity of the camera.  While that exchange may not have been totally scripted and may have relied on ordinary persons, that exchange was still placed there intentionally by the authors.  The camera saw that exchange intentionally.  For the camera to bridge the symbolic and the real, it had to lie.  It had to be subjective.

In fact, even leaving Italian neo-realism to other, more real genres, we still find an efficacy of the film form to remain objective.  For instance, the film *Titicut Follies* represents the genre of direct cinema.  Even though the filmmaker attempted to portray as accurately as possible the goings-on inside the hospital without interference, he necessarily failed.  He could not portray all that happened, the entire context of the patients’ lives or even of their hospitalization.  For him to portray to the viewer the entirety, objective plight of the patients was impossible, because he had limited time and space in which to do that.  So then, the decisions he made to do that were well within the language of the cinema.  He used the cinema to speak for him.  However, it was not objective and could not be because a subjective viewpoint necessarily isometrizes the perspective.

The problem with Bazin’s statements lies in a simple ordeal with first-order logic.  Since the cinema must convey ideas, it must use language.  However, this language cannot match the real world exactly; it can only offer an approximation to it.  So then, it has to compromise some truth, and that truth is determined by its perspective, which puts an inherently subjective tilt on what is portrayed.  So then, both of his assumptions cannot coexist.  Speaking from a textual perspective, he proposed that the cinema-—as part of the symbolic-—could portray exactly the real.  This is an alluring viewpoint.  After all, we seem to see the same thing on the screen as in life.  However, the symbolic can never truly portray the real.  In the real, things must exist.  The real does not rely on questions of ontology.  In film’s cellulose, silver exists—whether it exist as an element or as a salt.  In the real, the silver cannot not exist.  The symbolic, however, as aforementioned, always supposes the question of ontology.  The symbolic—-and therefore cinema—cannot be objective.

Perhaps the best way to exemplify this textual perspective is to use postmodern film.  As its name would suggest, postmodern cinema is treated as a text, and it plays intertextually with the symbolic, imaginary, and real.  Take Lynch’s Mulholland Drive.  Consider the scene in the theatre where the magician says, “no hay la banda.”  The magician, here, too makes a statement about recording--and therefore about film.  The recording presents something that does not exist.  It supposes in the imaginary, through its language, the existence of something not within the real.  Of course, this is within a film and makes a larger statement.  In some sense, in this real world, that recording does not even exist; however, it still supposes the existence of something else entirely.  The cinema, like all other methods of recording and of art, cannot, as Bazin suggests, perfectly bridge the symbolic—its diegesis—and the real—its objectivity.  This film also further suggests the cinema’s close relation to language and the symbolic.  The film emerges from the underworld—the symbolic and linguistic realm—of the unconscious, and is very much a part of the language of cinema, as Bazin says.  However, contrary to Bazin, it is not objective, nor does it even pretend to be.

An argument could be made that cinema is still more objective than the art forms that came before it.  Indeed, a painter is not necessary to merely imprint an object onto the silver emulsion.  However, an object’s being filmed in a vacuum has no meaning, objective or subjective.  It tells no story--has no language.  To give the cinema language, it must have meaning.  For the cinema to have meaning, it must have subjectivity.  The nature of language is to subjectivize, as I wrote earlier.  The cinema’s appearence of objectivity does not inherently lend objectivity to its meaning any more than any other art form.  Sure, one might be hard-pressed to say that modern cinema does not portray the world more closely to our perception than, say Goya’s dark paintings.  However, one would be equally hard-pressed to say that Titticut Follies represents the feeling of madness better than "The Tell-Tale Heart" or that a modern war film shows the plight of war better than "Flander’s Fields."

In conclusion, the perspective of the camera stops it from being inherently subjective, even within the diegesis of the film, even over time.  The fact that the camera shows us things as we see them does not free the painter from realism.  The artist still has to decide how real he wants his art to be, even within the medium of film.  Bazin was correct that cinema is a language.  He, however, was mistaken to assert its inherent objectivity.  If we want to portray something objectively, we must try very hard, even with a video camera.  To echo Glenn Gould, the cinema lies, and almost always gets away with it.